This is an interview with Dr. Larry Hickman by
Kelly Wood on December 6, 1990, concerning the 60s
movement. In the interest of accumulating
knowledge, I am asking you, Dr. Hickman, to donate
this tape to the Texas A&M Oral History Collection
in the University Archives. Is this okay with you?
Sure. Okay, great. Now I guess we'll begin. Where
and when were you born? I was born in October 6,
1942, in McAllen, Texas.
Why did you choose to attend Hardin-Simmons
University? I was interested in religious
matters and religious studies and decided to go
there because it had a program in religious
studies that would be satisfactory to me. I grew up
in the Southern Baptist Church. And although I
wasn't interested in majoring in religion, I was
interested in having access to some of the
thinking in that area. As an undergraduate at
Hardin-Simmons between 1960 and 1964, what were
the dorm rules and regulations like? Dorm rules
and regulations were different for male and
female students, as I suppose they still are. The
dorm rules and regulations for men, basically,
male students didn't have any particular hours
they had to keep.
And in fact, apart from prohibitions against
excessive noise, I suppose there weren't any
regulations. The female students had to be in by 11
o'clock on weeknights and 12 o'clock on weekends.
And apart from that, I don't know what their other
prohibitions were. Okay. Was there a dress code?
There was no official dress code as far as dressing
up. At Hardin-Simmons in the 1960s, the female
students were not allowed to wear slacks, Levi's,
anything like that. They had to wear dresses. You
wouldn't, in fact, although I don't think it was
official, you wouldn't wear Bermuda shorts to
class. But as far as wearing a tie or something like
that, that wasn't required. It was a little more
formal than now, but not terribly so. Was drinking
allowed? There was no drinking allowed, not only
on the campus at Hardin-Simmons, being a Baptist
college, a Baptist university, but also Abilene
was dry. And in fact, it was only as I became a
senior, I think, in 1964, did a local precinct go
wet. So during most of the time I was there, alcohol
was not available, oh, within a 50-mile radius of
Abilene. Okay, thank you. Were your grades sent
home to your parents? My grades were sent home to my
parents, I believe. It's hard to reach back that
far to get that memory, but yeah, I think they were.
Okay, and when you attended University of Texas,
did you still experience this in loco
parenthesis? No, the grades weren't sent, if
that's what you're asking. Grades were not sent to
my parents when I was a graduate student at the
University of Texas. There were, of course, no
dress codes. I mean, you didn't, you could wear
shorts to class if you felt like it. And I didn't
live in a dorm, so I don't know what the
restrictions were then.
Certainly there was a much looser kind of
atmosphere at the University of Texas, but it may
just be accounted for by the fact that
Hardin-Simmons was a small Baptist university of
1,800 students, and the University of Texas was a
large state university of 18,000 students. So it
was an increase on the order of 10 in terms of the
size of the university.
Was the draft an issue discussed in 1960 through
64? Not very much, although I've got to admit that I
thought about the military service a good bit,
because when I reached Hardin-Simmons, I was
shocked to learn that ROTC was required for all
freshman and sophomore male students. I hadn't
known about that to that point, or I might have
considered a different university. In those
days, the Southern Baptists made a big deal out of
the fact that they didn't accept any foreign aid,
any federal aid, to them it was foreign aid, but any
federal aid from, well, any aid from the U.S.
government, and therefore would be able to keep
their universities pure from any kind of federal
influence. What they did, however, was they kind
of pawned or or hawked their freshman and
sophomore students, made them take ROTC, and
therefore collected a bounty of X dollars per head
for every freshman and sophomore male student. It
was kind of a backdoor way of getting federal aid,
and I was a pawn in that game. A good many of my fellow
students decided to take the junior and senior
year of ROTC, which meant they got a nice monthly
stipend. The only problem, of course, it wasn't a
very big problem in 1963 or late 1962 or 1963 when
they were deciding to do this, was that they would,
in fact, have to spend two years in the Army. But no
one thought much about that in 1962-63. There were
some miscellaneous skirmishes going on in some
place called Indochina, but nobody paid much
attention to it. Unfortunately, our class
graduated in 1964, and some of the people who had
thought they'd pursue a kind of a quiet, calm
career of a couple of maybe four years in the Army
got some rather rude surprises. In fact, some of
them, by 1966, by the time they would have retired
from the service, in 1968, were dead. Did you fight
in the Vietnam War? No, I didn't fight in the
Vietnam War. I chose not to go into the advanced
ROTC. I didn't like the military discipline of the
first two years. and thought that there were
better ways to spend my time. And I never did... I
never did... I saw no military service at all in the
60s. How did you get out of serving in the war? It was
very complicated. For the first thing, I mean,
there were a whole series of circumstances. The
first thing is that I was married shortly before
and therefore had what was then called a 2A
deferment shortly before President Johnson
canceled the deferment. It was really quite just
happenstance that that
deferment was canceled shortly after I was
married. So I had the 2A. That, I had the feeling,
would not have gotten me through the war. I was also
a 2S, which was a student deferment, and in fact was
in graduate school for quite a number of years. I
mean, the standard amount of time one takes to
pursue a Ph.D., which in my case was about six
years. And I have a feeling, however, that a much
more important factor was that my draft board was
in San Antonio. And I have a feeling that I profited
from the fact, that is, I benefited from the fact
that there were lots of poor Hispanic males in San
Antonio who could be drafted, and that they didn't
have to dip into the pool of people who were in
school quite so far, pursuing higher educations,
quite so far in San Antonio because of the pool they
had there. That's a hunch. I've never been able to
document that, nor have I tried. but it certainly
is a reasonable hypothesis, I think. Did you
support the war? At the very first, I suppose, in
1965,
I thought that it was a good idea to, being rather
naive about the history of the area, I thought that
a larger military presence was required and that
the thing could have gotten over with rather
quickly if there had been a larger commitment. I
had the good fortune, however, to, I was attending
a Baptist church in Austin at the time, this was
about 1965, and was, no, wait, I'm sorry, this is
the fall, in fact, of 1964. I was attending Baptist
Church there near the university, which was, I
suppose, the university church, really quite a
liberal one by Southern Baptist standards. And
the assistant minister there, who was quite a
liberal sort, asked me to conduct a discussion
group on what was then called the Indochina
question. Being a person who felt the need to
research topics before I led discussion groups. I
went to the library and read a bunch of books on
Indochina, on Vietnamese history. I was
especially interested in books by Bernard Fall,
who had been a student of that part of the world for
many years, a French correspondent, who in fact
had an advanced degree in Indochina studies. And
during the course of that semester, as a matter of
fact, my views really changed from supporting the
war to
profound doubt that the war was winnable and that
it was advisable. I often thought later that if
everybody in America had had the occasion to go to
the library and read a few books on Vietnam, maybe
things would have been a little different much
earlier. Why did you become against it? Well,
Bernard Fall and the other people who I read
convinced me that it was a civil war, that the
menace of communism was in fact not so much
anything that was threatening to the United
States as it was a kind of difference of opinion
about the way that the Vietnamese should conduct
their affairs. and that the Vietnamese had no
tradition of democracy such as we had in this
country and they therefore were being presented
in ways by the government and by the media that were
pretty much false. So I began to think that the
problem was a a local one rather than a global one. I
wasn't actively opposed to the war at that point,
but I did have serious doubts about American
involvement in it. I wasn't by any means out
demonstrating in 1964, and as far as I know, no one
else was either. But I began to take the issue very
seriously, had discussions with my friends, I
still would not say I was a dove. Some of my friends
were. In fact, some of my friends were much further
to the left on that issue than I was at that point.
But at least it opened up ways of talking to people
because I at least began to have an informed
opinion as opposed to just an opinion. What did you
do besides discussion groups to be actively
against it? In 1964, not very much, because things
were fairly low-key in 1964. By the time the war
began to heat up, we began to have demonstrations.
I don't remember the year this occurred, but I can
remember being in one of the first, taking part in
one of the first anti-war demonstrations in
Austin. It was a march up Congress Avenue from the
river. There couldn't have been more than 50
people, and there were people throwing things at
us from the sidewalk.
The numbers are very small, and really we were
considered a very radical group, although today
it would not be considered terribly radical to do
that. There was difficulty getting parade
permits for unpopular causes. And in fact, that
experience has really profoundly affected my
views about the First Amendment and the
importance of the First Amendment. So that, for
instance, later when the Klan wanted to march in
Skokie, Illinois, I basically supported their
right to do it, despite the fact that I think the
Klan a bunch of scum. It seems to me that even scum
are protected by the First Amendment. So that was
very formative. To have people hurl epithets and
physical objects at you for expressing your view
was a very important experience.
What were your ideas on civil rights? Well, civil
rights was an issue which had been very much a part
of the American scene even when I was in college. I
wasn't involved very much in that in the 1960s
because the issue was not really a big issue in
Abilene, Texas.
Ethnic minorities in Abilene were a minimum.
There were very few blacks, and so, I mean, Abilene
is really not a part of the South. It's a part of the
West, and so I suppose my my interest in that. I've
got to also add that I really grew up in what might be
called Mexican Texas or Hispanic Texas rather
than the portions of Texas that had a good number of
black people. So I was really more aware of
discrimination against Hispanics than aware of
discrimination against blacks. And therefore it
really wasn't until I went to Austin, and I began to
be interested in that issue that really had been
part of the American scene for some time. When I
moved to Austin in 1964, the Paramount Theater was
still segregated. The black people had to sit
upstairs in the balcony, and there were
demonstrations. I didn't take part in any of those
demonstrations, but I was aware of them and was
very sympathetic toward the demonstrators.
Did a person have to have long hair and do drugs to be
considered in during the 60s? No, not at all. Some
of my best friends, in fact, in the SDS, the
Students for a Democratic Society, had short hair
and they wore sports coats and ties and didn't do
drugs because they wanted to look as normal as
possible, in quotes, so that they could have the
greatest political effect. So they thought of
themselves as kind of wearing protective
coloring, so to speak, in order to get their ideas
out. So that certainly would be false to say that.
And in fact, I don't think that long hair was by any
means a badge of honor. It seemed to me always just a
matter of personal taste. It may have, I mean, it
certainly had to do something with the freedom to
be different that was being expressed and kind of a
reaction against the stereotypes that we'd grown
up with. But I don't know that it was, I don't know
that it was for me ever a member of joining a club as
it was just something different to try and see if I
liked it. What is your definition of a hippie?
Well, hippie is a term that was invented by Time
Magazine, and if I could quote Joe Krupa, who's now
the chair of the English department at the
University of Texas, and who was a young hip
faculty member when I was there, that probably has
never been a hippie.
It's a term that was invented by Time Magazine and,
like a lot of other words that purport to refer, I'm
not sure it does. What is clear is that there began
to be alternate lifestyles expressed in the
1960s. And if you want to call those people
hippies, well, that's fine, but you just have to
spend a lot of time defining your terms and say what
you mean by it. So I have no definition because I'm
not sure the term really works very well. So did you
have your hair long? I wore my hair long for quite a
number of years. And in fact, when I got a job at
Texas A&M, my hair was probably almost as long as
yours. That means shoulder length. Yes. When did
you first see people with these alternate
lifestyles? And what was your impression of them?
Well, Austin in 1964, 1965
was beginning to have people who, well actually I
guess 65, 66 was beginning to have people who were
in touch with friends on the West Coast.
There were people who had come from the West Coast,
from the Berkeley area, to Austin in the
mid-1960s, I guess around 1965. And I remember the
opening of the first Rock Palace, which was
anything but a palace. It was an old kind of dumpy
storefront on Congress Avenue. And what was the
name of the place? Well,
I can't even remember now, but it was a place that
really had the first people with extremely long
hair, I guess, that I'd seen. Although that's not
quite true. Actually, people began to come
through there, but as a matter of fact, in 1965 or
1966, I guess it was, a friend and I went, when was
the Summer of Peace and Love? I can't even remember
now, whatever year that was, in Haight-Ashbury.
Some friends and I actually drove out to
California to see what was going on, and of course
there were several people with long hair and beads
and love signs, peace signs, and so on then. But
gradually more and more people, there was always a
lot of commerce between the West Coast and Austin,
even before the 60s. Austin was on the music scene,
kind of the college music scene. I mean, if you were
going to make a tour, it would include not only
Berklee and other places, but Austin, Little
Rock, and so it was on that circuit that went from
the west coast to the east coast and back. I mean,
there were a lot of people from the west coast
coming in. When you saw these people in
California, what did you think of them? I mean, did
you laugh at them, or did you want to be a part of
them? No, by no means. I was fascinated with the...
I mean, I've always been interested in things that
were different, and so I've always thought that we
don't have all the answers, no matter how we live or
what we do. So I was fascinated by the whole
business. I stayed in California for, I guess, a
week or so, and met people, talked to people, and I
listened to some of the music that some of the
groups out there were beginning to play. I
remember the first time I heard Country Joe and the
Fish. It was quite a wonderful experience. I
saw the cultural phenomenon as one that had a lot of
interest, and who knows what it would do. Could you
define what a radical is? Well, of course, the
dictionary definition of a radical is someone who
wants to go to the root of the matter. And what that
comes down to in any particular social and
political unit or society is, well, it'll differ
from society to society. I suppose if you were... a
radical during the 1960s, it meant that you were
deeply distrustful of the US government. You felt
you'd been lied to. You felt that there was a basic
unfairness about the way that minorities were
being treated, about the way that you were being
treated if you were up for the draft. and that the
government was no longer really responding to the
problems that were apparent and that something
radical or drastic needed to be done. That took
different forms for different people. You said
you joined SDS? No, I never joined SDS. I had a good
number of friends in SDS, but I was never a member.
Why didn't you join SDS? I was busy being a graduate
student. I didn't join anything, basically. I
wasn't a member of any clubs or groups when I was a
graduate student. I was working very hard. It's
not that I was in graduate school for a deferment. I
had a deferment because I was in graduate school.
Even though I was active politically in terms of
supporting friends who were involved with
political activities and involved myself in
marches and did whatever I could, I saw the
political kind of thing that was going on as part of
a broader cultural manifestation. So
I really didn't join any groups. Why didn't you
join these groups? I really didn't have the time to
be an active member of any of the groups. I
preferred to
be a part, that is, on the edge of several groups
without actually getting into the
organizational or administrative aspects of it.
I did not think that I had the time to be a leader in
any kind of political or cultural manifestation
because I was working very hard being a graduate
student. Well, when you look back on your years at
the University of Texas, can you remember some of
the radical events that you witnessed or
participated in? Oh, sure. I can remember the
radical events. I guess you mean some of the things
that really occurred either on a large scale that
indicated satisfaction with the status quo or
something of that sort. I remember very clearly
the day that the students demonstrated against
the invasion of Cambodia. And I don't remember the
year. We could look it up. It must have been 67, 68,
maybe. Well, actually, it was later than that. It
was Nixon, so it would have to have been later, 69,
70. The demonstrations against that formed a line
of people four or six abreast that started off by
the Student Union Building in Austin, went all the
way down to the Capitol, which is 12th Street,
which is some eight or nine blocks away, and then
came back up to the east side of the campus, to the
Littlefield Fountain. And there were so many
people that by the time the first bunch were
getting to the fountain, the last bunch were just
beginning to leave the student center. And that's
a lot of people. I mean, one could estimate maybe
25,000 people marching that day. That's quite
remarkable. I do remember other demonstrations
at which I suppose the most dangerous one I
witnessed was the at the time that there were
several speeches made on the steps of the
administration building at the University of
Texas, and there was one particular speaker who
encouraged everybody to march on the state
capitol. And as it turned out, the administration
got wind of that and posted a line of Texas Rangers
and DPS troopers at the base of the plaza there in
front of the administration building. They were
heavily armed, and there were some very tense
moments at that point.
I'm kind of a political pragmatist, and I thought
that the calls for action that were advanced by
some of my fellow students were just a little bit
foolish, and that the same kind of results could
have been achieved by means that would not have the
seeds of violence. It seemed to me, even at the
time, that violence was not a very good solution to
any of the problems. I mean, that's what we were
against, right? So that for people who were
claiming that we should, quote, bring war home, I
didn't have much sympathy for that. Do you
remember the LBJ library being built in a protest
against that? Yeah, sure. In fact,
there were protests against that. There were
protests against much of the building project
that was going on during that time. that was
initiated by Frank Irwin, who was the head of the
Board of Regents at that time. The students and
Frank Irwin didn't get along at all. In fact, he
called a group of them a bunch of dirty nothings at
some point. And that became a quite popular phrase
around the university. People were describing
themselves as dirty nothings. And yeah, I
remember that. And in fact, I was back at the
University of Texas as a faculty member the day,
the year that the LBJ Library was dedicated. And I
had an office overlooking, or with a view of the LBJ
Library, I went up to go to work on a Saturday, and
there was a guy in a blue suit with sunglasses and
saddle oxfords with a white button-down shirt
telling me I couldn't go to my office. Apparently
my window had a little too clear a view of the place
where LBJ was going to make his speech, so they just
told me I'd have to come back later. And did you? I
didn't argue with them. When did you first think
about women's liberation? Well, that's
difficult to answer because it's not real clear
exactly
when women's liberation began to be a term. The
history of the women's movement, of course, goes
back a long way. But if the question is, When did I
become aware that there were serious deficits in
our society, serious deficiencies in our society
regarding the way that women are treated? I
suppose that was also about the time that I was in
Austin. I didn't really think a whole lot about
that when I was in Abilene because, well, things
were very quiet in Abilene. There really wasn't
much stimulation to thinking. you just kind of did
your thing and you got your degree and there really
wasn't much intellectual stimulation.
I began to be aware of that really much more from
1964 on, and I think partially as a consequence of
meeting women and getting to know women who were
dissatisfied with their situation and had
legitimate gripes. And it was really impossible
not to have a great deal of sympathy and to come to
see their side of things. What did you think about
women before their movement? Before the... I'm
sorry. Before the women's liberation movement.
What did you think? Did you think that their place
was in the home? Or what did you think? Well, I
wouldn't say that I ever thought that. But... I
would say I had a much more traditional view of
matters, not necessarily that the woman's place
should be in the home, but let's just say that I
didn't see the possibilities for
the kind of self-actualization of women in our
society that I began to see later. You've got to
remember that Hardin-Simmons, for all of its
faults, had a very strong tradition of women who
went out and did things. They were missionaries,
and they were all kinds of religious leaders, and
they didn't depend on a lot of men to help them do it.
So there was that strong tradition among the
Southern Baptists that by George, if a young woman
wanted to train to be a missionary in Nigeria,
she'd didn't particularly need the help of a young
man to do it. It would be nice if she could marry
somebody who was interested in that sort of thing,
but by gum, she could just go do it herself. And so
there was that dimension that was there even then.
What impact did Women's Lib have on your life? Oh
boy, that's a very large question. And I guess it
would be difficult to answer since it's still
going on. To tell you the truth, I just don't even
know how to answer the question.
I include
components in my courses now on feminist issues
and try to be as sensitive as possible to the kinds
of grievances that women in their society have.
I've been a member of the National Organization
for Women for several years. And apart from that,
though, it would be very hard to
sum up that kind of changes in a brief time, because
it's just been very extensive. Do you foresee any
of the 1960s idealism and freedom to do your own
thing for the 1990s? Well, I don't know if it's
going to come in the 1990s or not. I hope it will. I
hoped it would in the 1980s, and I hoped it would in
the 1970s. I hoped it would continue. because I
think idealism, especially among young people,
is very good and that it's something that can be
mobilized for great advantage. But don't you
think that it can let people down? I mean, if you
have idealism, then you can just kind of be let
down? Well, you certainly can, and I'm not sure
there's anything that one does that doesn't allow
for being let down at some point. But it seems to me
that... During the 1960s, when young men and women
were going off to the Peace Corps and they were
getting into careers in academics that they
thought were important, even though perhaps
low-paying, and they believed that one should be
aware of social issues and try to make a change for
the better, and they were paying attention to
Kennedy's famous remark that they should ask what
they could do for their country. It seemed to me
that that was a better time, certainly better one
than a time during which the primary goal is to get a
high-paying job immediately after college and to
put blinders on in a way that makes one unaware of
the social problems around one. So I would welcome
a new upthrust of of idealism and hope that it
wouldn't be too long before we saw it again.
What is the impact on the counterculture on
American society? Well, I think it's very
profound. And I think that there's a sense in which
the 60s have really never receded.
America is a much more pluralistic place than it
was prior to the 60s,
not only ethnically in terms of the awareness that
people have of other cultures. I mean, we think of
ourselves as a culture now in a way that we didn't
before the 1960s. We think of ourselves as a as a
society in which there are lots of different
groups competing for all kinds of different
things. But prior to the 1960s, that perception
was much smaller because it didn't include a lot of
people that it includes now. I think also in terms
of the arts, in terms of lifestyles, the freedom to
pursue alternative lifestyles. For instance,
before the 1960s, you really didn't see very many
people
working out non-traditional ways of living
together.
You didn't see groups of people getting together
and living together as you have recently begun to
see in certain places like the West Coast among
people who are, say, in their 60s or 70s for mutual
aid and creating new kinds of families. So my point
here, then, is that a lot of different models were
tried out in the 1960s, and some of them didn't work
very well, and some of them worked pretty well and
they were retained and we still got a lot of that
stuff going on now. I think that the arts are much
more open as a result of changes in the 1960s. That
we've learned some lessons, we learned some
lessons in the 60s about freedom of expression and
individual rights or individual liberties that
we still haven't forgotten. And there was an
experimentalism then that we still retain
important vestiges of. The problem is that all of
this kind of exists below a rather thick layer of
greed in the 1980s, and in fact a thick layer of
scandalous behavior. And that's truly
unfortunate. And maybe we can get, I don't know,
maybe during the 90s, people who really care about
each other and about the society and about the
environment can get the country back from the
bastards who've been kind of taking advantage of
the rest of us. I don't know. It depends on whether
we've got the guts to do it or not. Overall, in your
opinion, what is the impact of radicals on
American society? Well, again, the term radical
is a very vague one for me, and I'm not sure exactly
what it means.
I suppose one could approach the question by
asking, where are the old radicals of the 1960s?
And of course, some of the greatest ones are not
with us anymore. Jerry Rubin is no longer around.
Tom Hayden is still a congressman in California. I
think that the radicals, I think that there's a
basic problem with being a radical, and that is
that you have to make a case that's so extreme that
its time in play sometimes is very short. It seems
to me that even though the model may seem somewhat
simplistic, things do tend to operate in pendulum
swings. And a radical may be, the message of a
radical may in fact be only relevant when the
pendulum is at the extreme positions. It doesn't
mean we can't learn from these people, but what it
usually means is that their position is not one
that works over the long run. It seems to me that
people who've really made more of a difference in
the long run in the American society have been
people who have taken ideas from radicals from all
persuasions, all parts of the political and
social spectrum, and found ways of sorting out
what was good from what was bad. And so in this
regard, I guess I'm a real pragmatist, trying to
find things that work as opposed to trying to find
things that fit an ideology. And one final
question. What do you think the impact of the 1960s
is on us now? Well, I think that's what it is. I think
that we're more experimental and we're probably
able to listen to a wider diversity of viewpoints
and we're willing to try out things that weren't
previously even considered.
I hope that those effects will continue. I think
they'll almost have to, because I think that the
1960s brought in what can only be termed a real
cultural revolution. And I don't mean just in
terms of the clothes people wore and how they wore
their hair and so on, because a lot of that's gone.
But cultural revolution in the sense of the way
that we perceive ourselves as
not so much fixed anymore and not so much as a
society that's finished somehow and we just need
to do some fine-tuning, but one that really in
which active, ongoing experimentation is really
important. I think that's a very rich heritage
from the 1960s. Thank you very, very much. Thank
you.
Hi, I'm Kelly Wood, and this is December 6th, and
I'm interviewing Larry Hickman concerning the
60s movement.